=head1 NAME

Inline-Support - Support Information for Inline.pm and related modules.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document contains all of the latest support information for C<Inline.pm> and the recognized Inline Language Support Modules (ILSMs) available on CPAN.

=head1 SUPPORTED LANGUAGES

The most important language that Inline supports is C. That is because Perl itself is written in C<C>. By giving a your Perl scripts access to C<C>, you in effect give them access to the entire glorious internals of Perl. (Caveat scriptor :-)

As of this writing, Inline also supports:

 - C++
 - Python
 - CPR

Projects that I would most like to see happen in the year 2001 are:

 - Java
 - Fortran
 - Ruby
 - Bash

B<Note:> Since many C<C> compilers allow the use of assembly code within C, you may want to consider Assembly Language as supported. Ready to start scripting out new device drivers?

=head1 SUPPORTED PLATFORMS

C<Inline::C> should work anywhere that CPAN extension modules (those that use XS) can be installed, using the typical install format of:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    make test
    make install

It has been tested on many Unix variants and Windows NT.

B<NOTE>: C<Inline::C> requires Perl 5.005 or higher because C<Parse::RecDescent> requires it. (Something to do with the C<qr> operator)

Inline has been tested on the following platforms:

 V#   OS      OS V#   Perl V# Human              Email 
 0.20 FreeBSD 3.4     5.00503 Timothy A Gregory  tgregory@tarjema.com      
 0.20 FreeBSD 4.0     5.00503 Timothy A Gregory  tgregory@tarjema.com      
 0.20 FreeBSD 4.0     5.6     Timothy A Gregory  tgregory@tarjema.com      
 0.20 Linux   2.0.36  5.00503 Prakasa Bellam     pbellam@cobaltgroup.com
 0.20 HPUX    B.10.20 5.00503 Jamie Shaffer      jshaffer@chronology.com
 0.20 SunOS   5.6     5.6.0   Jamie Shaffer      jshaffer@chronology.com
 0.20 SunOS   5.5.1   5.6.0   Jamie Shaffer      jshaffer@chronology.com
 0.22 OpenBSD 2.7     5.6.0   Jeremy Devenport   jeremy@weezel.com
 0.22 FreeBSD 3.1     5.00503 Doug Beaver        dougb@scalar.org
 0.25 Linux   2.2.13  5.00503 Brian Ingerson     ingy@cpan.org
 0.25 Linux   2.2.13  5.6     Brian Ingerson     ingy@cpan.org
 0.25 WinNT   4.0 sp6 5.00503 Brian Ingerson     ingy@cpan.org
 0.26 Cygwin  1.1.1   5.6.0   Leo Schalkwyk      L.Schalkwyk@iop.kcl.ac.uk
 0.26 AIX     4.3.3   5.00502 Norbert E. Gruener nog@MPA-Garching.MPG.DE
 0.26 BeOS    5.03Pro 5.00503 Daniel J. Berger   djberge@uswest.com

The Microsoft tests deserve a little more explanation. I used the following:

 Windows NT 4.0 (service pack 6)
 Perl 5.005_03 (ActiveState build 522)
 MS Visual C++ 6.0
 The "nmake" make utility (distributed w/ Visual C++)

C<Inline::C> pulls all of its base configuration (including which C<make> utility to use) from C<Config.pm>. Since your MSWin32 version of Perl probably came from ActiveState (as a binary distribution) the C<Config.pm> will indicate that C<nmake> is the system's C<make> utility. That is because ActiveState uses Visual C++ to compile Perl.

To install C<Inline.pm> (or any other CPAN module) on MSWin32 w/ Visual C++, use these:

    perl Makefile.PL
    nmake
    nmake test
    nmake install

The "Cygwin" test was done on a Windows 98 machine using the Cygwin Unix/Win32 porting layer software from Cygnus. The C<perl> binary on this machine was also compiled using the Cygwin tool set (C<gcc>). This software is freely available from http://sources.redhat.com/cygwin/

If Inline works on your platform, you can email me the info above. If it doesn't work, let me know as well and I'll see what can be done.

=head1 SEE ALSO

For general information about Inline see L<Inline>.

For information about using Inline with C see L<Inline::C>.

For sample programs using Inline with C see L<Inline::C-Cookbook>.

For information on writing your own Inline Language Support Module, see L<Inline-API>.

Inline's mailing list is inline@perl.org

To subscribe, send email to inline-subscribe@perl.org

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Ingerson <INGY@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2001, Brian Ingerson. 

All Rights Reserved.  This module is free software. It may be used, redistributed and/or modified under the terms of the Perl Artistic License.

See http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html

=cut
